Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
neonatal and paediatric physiology. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. How do you define the paediatric age groups,
and why do their physiological differences matter to the anaesthetist?
By convention a neonate is an infant in the first twenty-eight days of life,
or to forty-four weeks post-conceptual age; an infant is up to one year;
and a child from one year to puberty. A preterm infant is born before thirty-seven
weeks.
These divisions matter because the child is not a small adult:
physiology changes continuously and most rapidly in the neonatal period,
and almost every system relevant to anaesthesia differs from the adult.
The cardiovascular system has a stiff, rate-dependent output;
the respiratory system has high oxygen demand and low reserve, desaturating fast;
the airway is anatomically distinct; thermoregulation is precarious;
renal and hepatic immaturity alter fluid and drug handling; and body composition,
haemoglobin and the central nervous system are all in flux.
The smaller the child, and the more premature,
the more extreme these differences and the smaller the margin for error,
so that absolute quantities — drug doses, fluid volumes, blood loss,
tube sizes — must be calculated to weight and the physiology anticipated.
So defining the age group orients us to where on this steep developmental curve the
patient sits, and the youngest and most premature demand the greatest adjustment
and vigilance.
Describe the cardiovascular physiology of the neonate.
The neonatal cardiovascular system is characterised by a relatively non-compliant,
immature myocardium and a transitional circulation.
The ventricle has fewer contractile elements and more connective tissue,
so it generates force less efficiently and has limited ability to increase stroke
volume; cardiac output is therefore largely heart-rate dependent,
and bradycardia is poorly tolerated and is in effect the neonatal equivalent of a
fall in output.
Resting heart rate is high, around one hundred and twenty to one hundred and sixty,
and resting cardiac output per kilogram is high to meet the high metabolic rate.
The myocardium depends heavily on extracellular calcium because its sarcoplasmic
reticulum is immature, making it sensitive to calcium-channel blockade and to the
calcium-lowering effects of citrated blood.
The circulation is transitional: the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus are
recently closed but can reopen — revert to fetal-type shunting — under hypoxia,
acidosis or raised pulmonary pressure,
causing persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.
The autonomic nervous system is parasympathetically predominant,
so vagal stimuli readily cause bradycardia.
So the neonatal heart is rate-dependent, calcium-dependent,
vagally sensitive and circulatorily transitional,
and the practical rule is to maintain heart rate and avoid the hypoxia and acidosis
that reopen fetal shunts.
How does that immature myocardium respond to anaesthetic agents?
The immature myocardium has less contractile reserve and a circulation more
dependent on heart rate and on filling,
so it is more vulnerable to the cardiovascular depression of anaesthetic agents.
Volatile agents are more cardiodepressant in the neonate than in the adult,
and because cardiac output is rate-dependent,
the bradycardia they and other agents can cause is especially dangerous;
halothane was notorious for this and sevoflurane,
the modern agent of choice for inhalational induction,
is better tolerated but still depresses contractility and can cause bradycardia and
hypotension at higher concentrations.
The neonate's limited ability to mount a compensatory tachycardia or
vasoconstriction means hypotension is less well defended.
The dependence on extracellular calcium makes the myocardium sensitive to the
calcium-binding effect of rapid citrated blood transfusion,
which can cause sudden hypotension,
so calcium may need replacing during large transfusion.
The baroreflex is immature, blunting compensation for hypovolaemia or
vasodilatation.
The practical consequences are to titrate volatile agents carefully,
to treat bradycardia promptly with atropine and by removing its cause,
to maintain filling, and to give calcium during rapid transfusion.
So the neonatal heart tolerates anaesthetic depression poorly, and protecting rate,
rhythm, filling and ionised calcium is central to safe neonatal anaesthesia.
Now the respiratory differences. Why does the neonate desaturate so rapidly?
The neonate desaturates within seconds rather than minutes of apnoea because oxygen
demand is high and oxygen reserve is low.
Oxygen consumption is around six to seven millilitres per kilogram per minute,
roughly double the adult value per kilogram,
reflecting the high metabolic rate of growth and thermogenesis.
The store from which that demand is met during apnoea is the functional residual
capacity, and in the neonate the functional residual capacity per kilogram is
similar to the adult but is functionally smaller because the closing capacity
exceeds it — small airways close during normal tidal breathing — so effective
oxygen reserve is reduced and atelectasis is ready to form.
The chest wall is highly compliant, being largely cartilaginous,
so it provides little outward recoil to hold the lungs open,
and the ribs are horizontal and the diaphragm the main muscle,
with fewer fatigue-resistant fibres.
Alveolar ventilation relative to functional residual capacity is high,
so inhaled-agent wash-in and wash-out are rapid.
The combination of high consumption and low,
unstable reserve means apnoea time before desaturation is very short.
So thorough preoxygenation, prevention of airway closure and atelectasis,
and minimising apnoea are essential,
because the neonate has little margin between a patent airway and hypoxaemia.
Expand on the mechanics — the chest wall,
lung volumes and the work of breathing in the infant.
The infant's respiratory mechanics are disadvantageous in several linked ways.
The chest wall is very compliant because the ribs are cartilaginous and
horizontally oriented and the intercostal muscles are weak,
so it contributes little to the elastic recoil that normally balances the lung's
tendency to collapse; the result is a lower functional residual capacity that must
be actively maintained, partly by laryngeal braking and a fast respiratory rate.
Because closing capacity exceeds functional residual capacity in the first months,
small airways close during tidal breathing,
predisposing to atelectasis and intrapulmonary shunt,
worsened by anaesthesia and the supine position.
The diaphragm, the principal muscle of breathing,
has fewer type-one slow-twitch fatigue-resistant fibres than in the adult,
so it tires sooner, and its efficiency is reduced when abdominal distension or gas
in the stomach pushes it up — hence the value of decompressing the stomach.
The compliant chest wall also means that vigorous inspiratory effort against an
obstruction produces sternal and intercostal recession rather than effective
ventilation.
The high resting respiratory rate and the rapid alveolar wash-in make inhalational
induction fast but also mean apnoea quickly causes trouble.
So the infant breathes with a collapsible chest, a low and unstable lung volume,
and a fatigue-prone diaphragm, all of which favour atelectasis and respiratory
failure and demand careful airway and ventilatory management.
Describe the anatomical differences of the paediatric airway.
The infant airway differs from the adult's in ways that change how we manage it,
though some classic teaching has been refined.
The head is large with a prominent occiput, which flexes the neck when supine,
so a shoulder roll rather than a pillow gives the neutral position.
The tongue is relatively large and the mouth small,
making it easy to obstruct and sometimes harder to displace at laryngoscopy.
The larynx is higher and more anterior,
at about the level of the third or fourth cervical vertebra rather than the fifth
or sixth, so the view is different.
The epiglottis is longer, stiffer and more U-shaped or omega-shaped and angled
posteriorly, which is why a straight laryngoscope blade used to lift the epiglottis
directly is often preferred in infants.
The narrowest part of the airway is classically described as the cricoid ring,
a complete cartilage, below the cords,
though imaging suggests the glottis may be functionally narrowest;
either way the subglottis is vulnerable,
and a tube that is too large risks mucosal oedema and post-extubation stridor,
which is why appropriately sized tubes and a leak are important.
The trachea is short, so endobronchial intubation and accidental extubation are
easy.
So the paediatric airway is higher, more anterior,
with a large head and tongue and a long stiff epiglottis and a vulnerable
subglottis, and these features dictate positioning, blade choice and tube sizing.
Tell me about the control of breathing in the neonate,
including apnoea of prematurity.
The neonatal respiratory centre is immature,
and its control of breathing is unstable, especially in the preterm.
The ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is present but the curve is shifted and
the slope reduced compared with the adult.
The response to hypoxia is biphasic and paradoxical:
a brief initial increase in ventilation is followed, within minutes,
by a sustained decrease — hypoxic ventilatory depression — the opposite of the
mature response, so hypoxia in the neonate can cause apnoea rather than stimulate
breathing, and this persists for some weeks.
Periodic breathing, with pauses of a few seconds, is common and usually benign.
Apnoea of prematurity is pathological:
pauses of more than fifteen to twenty seconds,
or shorter pauses with bradycardia or desaturation,
arising from immature central control, sometimes with an obstructive component,
and worsened by hypoxia, hypothermia, sepsis, hypoglycaemia and anaemia.
Crucially for us, former preterm infants are at risk of post-anaesthetic apnoea for
up to sixty weeks post-conceptual age,
so they require postoperative apnoea monitoring and are generally unsuitable for
day-case surgery; caffeine reduces the risk.
So neonatal respiratory control is immature with a dangerous hypoxic depression and
a propensity to apnoea, and the ex-preterm infant needs apnoea vigilance well
beyond the operation.
Why is thermoregulation so precarious in the neonate?
The neonate loses heat readily and produces it inefficiently,
so it becomes hypothermic quickly, and cold stress is genuinely dangerous.
Heat loss is rapid because the surface-area-to-mass ratio is large — up to three
times the adult's — so there is much surface to lose from relative to the mass that
generates and stores heat; subcutaneous fat is thin, insulation poor,
and the skin is thin and, in the very preterm, permeable to evaporative water loss.
Heat production is constrained because the neonate cannot shiver effectively.
Instead it relies on non-shivering thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue,
which uncouples mitochondrial respiration through thermogenin to produce heat
directly; this is effective but energetically costly and limited,
and it is abolished by some anaesthetic agents and by the very prematurity that
reduces brown-fat stores.
Cold stress has serious consequences:
it increases oxygen consumption and metabolic demand, causes metabolic acidosis,
depletes glucose causing hypoglycaemia,
and through hypoxia and acidosis can reopen the fetal shunts and cause pulmonary
hypertension.
The defences are environmental — a warm theatre, radiant warmers,
forced-air warming, warmed and humidified gases, warmed fluids,
and minimal exposure.
So the neonate combines high heat loss with limited, costly heat production,
making active warming a first-order priority of neonatal anaesthesia.
Describe renal function in the neonate and its implications for fluid management.
The neonatal kidney is anatomically complete but functionally immature,
and matures over the first one to two years.
The glomerular filtration rate at birth is low,
around a fifth to a third of the adult value corrected for surface area,
rising rapidly in the first weeks; this limits the excretion of a water or solute
load and prolongs the elimination of renally cleared drugs.
The concentrating ability is limited — the neonate can dilute urine reasonably but
cannot concentrate it to the adult maximum because the medullary gradient and
tubular responsiveness to antidiuretic hormone are immature — so the neonate is
vulnerable both to fluid overload, which it cannot excrete quickly,
and to dehydration, which it cannot defend by concentrating urine.
Sodium handling is also immature, with obligatory sodium loss in the very preterm.
Total body water is high, around seventy-five to eighty per cent of body weight in
the neonate against sixty in the adult,
with a relatively large extracellular compartment that contracts over the first
days, accounting for the normal early weight loss.
The implications are to calculate fluids carefully to weight,
to include glucose because of limited reserves, to monitor electrolytes,
and to avoid both overload and deficit.
So the immature kidney narrows the safe window for fluid and electrolyte balance
and slows renal drug clearance, demanding precise, weight-based prescribing.
How do you prescribe maintenance fluid and account for glucose in children?
Maintenance fluid in children is classically calculated by the Holliday–Segar,
or four-two-one, rule, which reflects metabolic rate.
The hourly requirement is four millilitres per kilogram for the first ten kilograms
of body weight, plus two millilitres per kilogram for the next ten,
plus one millilitre per kilogram for each kilogram above twenty.
So a twenty-five-kilogram child needs forty plus twenty plus five,
sixty-five millilitres an hour.
The choice of fluid has shifted: hypotonic solutions, once standard,
are now avoided for maintenance because they caused dangerous hyponatraemia and
cerebral oedema, so an isotonic solution,
such as balanced crystalloid or point-nine per cent saline, with added glucose,
is recommended.
Glucose matters because neonates and small infants have limited glycogen stores and
high glucose demand and are prone to fasting hypoglycaemia,
yet excess glucose causes hyperglycaemia and osmotic diuresis;
so a maintenance fluid containing one to two per cent glucose is often used and
blood glucose monitored, particularly in neonates, the preterm, and the sick.
Deficits from fasting and ongoing losses are added and replaced with isotonic
fluid, and blood loss replaced appropriately.
So maintenance follows the four-two-one rule with isotonic,
glucose-containing fluid, balancing the real risks of hyponatraemia and of
hypoglycaemia at the two extremes.
Discuss hepatic immaturity and neonatal jaundice.
The neonatal liver is immature in both its synthetic and its metabolic functions,
with consequences for drug handling and for bilirubin.
The enzyme systems of drug metabolism are underdeveloped at birth and mature over
weeks to months: phase-one oxidative pathways, the cytochrome enzymes, are reduced,
and phase-two conjugation, particularly glucuronidation, is markedly immature.
This prolongs the action of many drugs and, historically,
caused toxicity — the grey baby syndrome from chloramphenicol that the neonate
could not conjugate.
Synthetic function is also immature: vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors are low,
which is why all newborns are given vitamin K to prevent haemorrhagic disease of
the newborn.
The immaturity of glucuronyl transferase is central to neonatal jaundice:
the neonate has a high bilirubin load from the breakdown of fetal red cells with
their shorter lifespan, and a limited capacity to conjugate it,
so unconjugated bilirubin accumulates,
producing the common physiological jaundice of the second to fourth day.
This is usually benign, but very high unconjugated bilirubin is dangerous because,
being lipid-soluble, it can cross the immature blood–brain barrier and damage the
basal ganglia — kernicterus — so significant jaundice is treated with phototherapy
or exchange transfusion.
Drugs that displace bilirubin from albumin, such as sulphonamides, are avoided.
So hepatic immaturity slows drug metabolism, mandates vitamin K,
and underlies neonatal jaundice with its small but serious risk of kernicterus.
Tell me about the haematological differences — fetal haemoglobin and the
physiological anaemia of infancy.
At birth the haemoglobin concentration is high, around seventeen to nineteen grams,
and the majority is fetal haemoglobin, with its leftward-shifted,
high-affinity oxygen dissociation curve suited to placental oxygen uptake.
After birth, with oxygenation now by the lungs and a higher arterial oxygen
tension, erythropoietin falls, red cell production slows,
and the high-affinity fetal cells are gradually replaced by adult haemoglobin over
the first months.
The result is the physiological anaemia of infancy:
haemoglobin falls to a nadir of around nine to eleven grams at about two to three
months in the term infant, and lower and earlier in the preterm,
before recovering as adult haemoglobin and erythropoiesis increase.
This nadir is normally well tolerated because oxygen delivery is maintained by the
shift to adult haemoglobin, which offloads oxygen more readily,
and by a high cardiac output.
The blood volume is relatively large per kilogram — around eighty to ninety
millilitres per kilogram in the neonate,
more in the preterm — but the absolute volume is small,
so what is a trivial loss in an adult may be a large fraction of the circulating
volume in a neonate, and blood loss must be measured meticulously and replaced by
calculation.
So the infant transitions from high-affinity fetal haemoglobin through a
physiological anaemic nadir, and the small absolute blood volume makes accurate
measurement and replacement of loss critical.
How is the pharmacology of anaesthetic drugs altered in neonates and infants?
Paediatric pharmacology differs in both kinetics and dynamics and changes with age.
In distribution, the high total body water and large extracellular compartment
increase the volume of distribution of water-soluble drugs,
so a larger loading dose per kilogram may be needed — for instance of
suxamethonium, where neonates need around two milligrams per kilogram.
Protein binding is reduced because albumin and alpha-one-acid glycoprotein are
lower and fetal albumin binds less avidly, raising the free fraction of bound drugs.
Metabolism is slowed by hepatic enzyme immaturity,
and renal elimination by the low glomerular filtration rate,
so clearance of many drugs is reduced in the neonate and elimination prolonged,
mandating longer dosing intervals; yet by infancy and early childhood,
clearance per kilogram may exceed the adult's,
sometimes requiring relatively larger or more frequent doses.
The immature blood–brain barrier allows greater central penetration of some drugs,
increasing sensitivity to opioids and the risk of respiratory depression.
Pharmacodynamically the neuromuscular junction is immature,
altering relaxant responses.
The minimum alveolar concentration of volatile agents varies with age,
as I can detail.
So paediatric dosing must account for an expanded volume of distribution,
reduced binding, age-dependent clearance that is low in the neonate but high in the
toddler, and increased central sensitivity, and it is always calculated to weight.
You mentioned MAC varies with age. Describe that relationship.
The minimum alveolar concentration of the volatile agents,
the measure of anaesthetic potency, varies in a characteristic way with age.
It is relatively low in the neonate,
rises to a peak in infancy — around one to six months — and then declines
progressively throughout childhood, adulthood and old age.
So the infant of a few months has the highest anaesthetic requirement of any age,
needing the greatest volatile concentration,
while the neonate needs somewhat less than the infant,
and requirement falls steadily thereafter,
by roughly six per cent per decade in adult life.
The reasons for the infant peak and the neonatal dip are not fully understood but
are thought to involve developmental changes in the central nervous system,
neurotransmitters and possibly progesterone and endorphins in the neonate.
The practical importance is that volatile requirements cannot be assumed constant:
the infant needs a higher delivered concentration than the adult for the same
depth, while the neonate, despite immaturity, needs a little less than the infant,
and the elderly need much less.
This must be balanced against the greater cardiovascular depression these agents
cause at the extremes of age.
So MAC is highest in infancy, lower in the neonate, and falls with advancing age,
and anaesthetic delivery is titrated to the age-appropriate requirement and to the
patient's tolerance of depression.
What are the relevant gastrointestinal differences and the risk of necrotising
enterocolitis?
The neonatal gastrointestinal tract is immature in motility,
sphincter function and barrier integrity.
Lower oesophageal sphincter tone is low and gastro-oesophageal reflux is common and
usually physiological, resolving with maturity;
gastric emptying is variable and can be slow,
particularly when the infant is unwell or distressed,
which bears on aspiration risk and fasting.
The gut mucosal barrier and immune defences are immature,
and the gut flora is only being established.
Necrotising enterocolitis is a serious,
characteristically neonatal — especially preterm — disease in which a portion of
bowel becomes ischaemic, inflamed and necrotic,
with the risk of perforation and overwhelming sepsis; its cause is multifactorial,
involving prematurity, enteral feeding,
ischaemia and bacterial colonisation of a vulnerable gut,
and it may follow events that compromise splanchnic perfusion such as hypoxia,
hypotension or a patent ductus stealing flow.
It presents with feed intolerance, abdominal distension and bloody stools,
and may require urgent surgery in a tiny, septic,
often coagulopathic and unstable neonate — among the most demanding of
anaesthetics, requiring meticulous attention to warmth, glucose, fluids,
blood products and gentle haemodynamic management.
So the neonatal gut shows physiological reflux and slow, variable emptying,
and in the preterm it is prone to necrotising enterocolitis,
a surgical emergency that tests every aspect of neonatal anaesthetic care.
Comment on the developing central nervous system and current concerns about
anaesthetic neurotoxicity.
The neonatal central nervous system is immature and developing rapidly,
with implications for pain, for vulnerability to injury,
and for the debated question of anaesthetic neurotoxicity.
Myelination and synaptogenesis are incomplete and continue for years.
The germinal matrix of the preterm brain is fragile and prone to intraventricular
haemorrhage, precipitated by swings in blood pressure,
cerebral blood flow and carbon dioxide,
so smooth haemodynamics and avoidance of hypercapnia and hypocapnia matter.
Cerebral autoregulation is present but may be limited or pressure-passive in the
sick preterm. It is now well established that neonates do feel and mount stress
responses to pain, and that untreated pain has lasting effects,
so adequate analgesia is a requirement, not an option.
The concern about anaesthetic neurotoxicity arises from animal studies in which
anaesthetic exposure during peak brain development caused neuronal apoptosis and
later behavioural deficits; in humans the evidence is reassuring for brief single
exposures, as the major prospective studies have shown no detectable harm,
while uncertainty remains for prolonged or repeated exposure in the very young.
The pragmatic position, reflected in regulatory advice,
is to avoid unnecessary prolonged anaesthesia in those under three years,
not to defer genuinely needed surgery, and to anaesthetise well.
So the developing brain is vulnerable to haemorrhage and to under-treated pain,
the neurotoxicity signal warrants caution about prolonged exposure,
and necessary surgery should proceed with good analgesia and stable physiology.
Why are neonates and infants prone to hypoglycaemia,
and how do you guard against it?
Neonates and small infants are prone to hypoglycaemia because their demand for
glucose is high while their reserves and the capacity to mobilise them are limited.
The brain of the neonate is large relative to the body and is an obligate glucose
consumer, so glucose turnover per kilogram is high.
Glycogen stores laid down late in gestation are small,
particularly in the preterm and the growth-restricted,
and are quickly exhausted by fasting or by the increased demand of cold stress,
sepsis or the work of breathing; the capacity for gluconeogenesis is also immature.
The infant of a diabetic mother is additionally prone to hypoglycaemia from fetal
hyperinsulinism. Hypoglycaemia is dangerous because the immature brain depends on
glucose and sustained hypoglycaemia causes neuronal injury,
yet its signs under anaesthesia are masked.
The guard against it is to limit fasting to the minimum,
to provide glucose-containing maintenance fluid in those at risk,
and to monitor blood glucose perioperatively in neonates, the preterm,
the small or sick infant, and the infant of a diabetic mother,
treating low values promptly with dextrose.
Equally, excessive glucose must be avoided because hyperglycaemia causes osmotic
diuresis and may worsen neurological injury.
So the small infant sits on a narrow glucose margin,
and the safeguards are short fasting, glucose in the fluids for those at risk,
and active monitoring.
What practical calculations and equipment sizing do you use for a child?
Safe paediatric practice rests on calculating everything to the child's weight and
on a few simple sizing formulae, because there is no margin for the adult habit of
standard doses.
Weight, if not known, can be estimated;
in the older child a common formula is weight in kilograms equals two times age in
years plus eight, though measured weight is always preferable.
Drug doses, fluid volumes and maximum local-anaesthetic doses are all then
prescribed per kilogram.
For the airway, the uncuffed tracheal tube internal diameter in millimetres is
classically estimated as age divided by four plus four,
with modern cuffed tubes sized about half a millimetre smaller;
the length at the lips is roughly age divided by two plus twelve,
or three times the tube's internal diameter.
Circulating blood volume is taken as around eighty millilitres per kilogram in the
infant, allowing the maximum allowable blood loss to be calculated before
transfusion. Maintenance fluid follows the four-two-one rule.
Defibrillation energy is four joules per kilogram,
adrenaline in arrest ten micrograms per kilogram.
Equipment — masks, laryngoscope blades,
supraglottic devices — is selected by size and weight.
So paediatric anaesthesia is quantitative and weight-based throughout,
and committing the key formulae for tube size and length, blood volume,
fluids and emergency drugs to memory is part of safe practice.
Finally, how do these differences shape your overall approach to the paediatric
patient?
Drawing it together, the child's physiology demands that anaesthesia be smaller in
dose, faster in tempo, warmer in environment and more precise in calculation than
the adult's, with the youngest and most premature requiring the greatest care.
I anticipate rapid desaturation from high oxygen consumption and low reserve,
so I preoxygenate, prevent atelectasis and minimise apnoea, and I manage a higher,
more anterior airway with appropriately sized equipment.
I protect a rate-dependent, calcium-dependent,
vagally sensitive circulation by maintaining heart rate,
treating bradycardia at once, titrating cardiodepressant agents and avoiding the
hypoxia and acidosis that reopen fetal shunts.
I make active warming a priority against rapid heat loss,
monitor and provide glucose against limited reserves,
and calculate fluids and drugs meticulously to weight using isotonic fluid.
I respect renal and hepatic immaturity in drug dosing,
account for the age-dependence of MAC,
and ensure good analgesia for a nervous system that feels pain and is vulnerable to
injury. I keep ex-preterm infants under postoperative apnoea monitoring.
So the unifying principle is that the child is a distinct and rapidly changing
physiological organism with little reserve,
and safe anaesthesia is the disciplined anticipation of every one of these
differences.
What are the fasting guidelines for children,
and how do they balance against aspiration and other risks?
Preoperative fasting in children aims to minimise the volume and acidity of gastric
contents and so the risk of aspiration at induction,
while avoiding the harms of excessive fasting — distress, dehydration,
hypoglycaemia and ketosis, to which small children are especially prone.
The widely taught rule is the six-four-two regimen:
six hours for solids and formula feed, four hours for breast milk,
which empties faster, and two hours for clear fluids.
Importantly, recent guidance has liberalised clear-fluid fasting,
with many institutions now encouraging clear fluids up to one hour before surgery,
because prolonged fluid fasting offers no aspiration benefit and the shorter time
keeps the child comfortable, better hydrated and less hypoglycaemic,
with a less acidic, lower-volume stomach.
The balance is therefore towards the minimum safe fast: generous,
encouraged clear fluids until close to surgery,
while respecting the longer intervals for milk and solids.
Emergency and unstarved children, and those with delayed gastric emptying from
pain, opioids, trauma or pathology such as pyloric stenosis,
are treated as having a full stomach and managed with a rapid sequence approach.
So paediatric fasting follows the six-four-two pattern with liberal clear fluids
late, deliberately minimising the fast to protect the small child from dehydration
and hypoglycaemia while still guarding the airway against aspiration.
Describe the circulatory transition at birth and persistent pulmonary hypertension
of the newborn.
At birth the circulation must convert from the fetal pattern,
in which the lungs are bypassed, to the adult pattern,
in which they are the sole site of gas exchange, and this transition can fail.
In utero the pulmonary vascular resistance is high because the fluid-filled lungs
are hypoxic and vasoconstricted, so blood bypasses them through the foramen ovale
and ductus arteriosus.
At birth, the first breaths aerate the lungs and the rise in alveolar oxygen
relaxes the pulmonary vessels, so pulmonary vascular resistance falls sharply and
pulmonary blood flow rises; simultaneously,
clamping the cord removes the low-resistance placenta and raises systemic
resistance.
The resulting rise in left atrial pressure closes the foramen ovale,
and rising oxygen with falling prostaglandins closes the ductus arteriosus over
hours to days.
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn occurs when this fall in pulmonary
vascular resistance fails — because of hypoxia, acidosis, meconium aspiration,
sepsis or congenital lung disease — so the resistance stays high and blood
continues to shunt right to left through the still-patent foramen ovale and ductus,
bypassing the lungs and causing severe, often labile hypoxaemia.
Management targets the triggers: oxygenation, correction of acidosis,
gentle ventilation, and pulmonary vasodilators such as inhaled nitric oxide.
So the transition depends on lung aeration lowering pulmonary resistance,
and when that fails the newborn reverts to fetal-type shunting with dangerous
hypoxaemia.
Comment on immune function in the neonate and the implications for infection.
The neonatal immune system is immature in both its innate and its adaptive arms,
leaving the newborn, and still more the preterm, vulnerable to infection,
which is a leading cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality.
Innate defences are reduced: neutrophil numbers and function, complement levels,
and the barrier function of thin, easily breached skin and an immature gut mucosa
are all suboptimal.
Adaptive immunity is also limited: the neonate has had little antigen exposure,
T-cell and B-cell responses are immature,
and the infant relies heavily on passively transferred maternal immunoglobulin G,
which crosses the placenta mainly in the last trimester — so the preterm,
born before much has transferred, is particularly exposed — supplemented by
immunoglobulin A from breast milk.
The consequences are a high susceptibility to bacterial sepsis,
often with non-specific presentation, rapid progression and few localising signs,
so a high index of suspicion is needed.
For the anaesthetist this means strict asepsis with invasive procedures and lines,
vigilance for the subtle signs of sepsis, which include feed intolerance,
temperature instability, apnoea and poor perfusion,
and recognition that the septic neonate requiring surgery,
such as for necrotising enterocolitis, is gravely unwell.
So immaturity of both innate and adaptive immunity,
and dependence on waning maternal antibody,
make the neonate highly prone to rapidly progressive infection,
demanding meticulous asepsis and a low threshold for suspecting sepsis.
How do you assess and manage pain in neonates and small children?
It is now firmly established that neonates, including the preterm,
perceive pain and mount marked physiological and hormonal stress responses to it,
that untreated pain has measurable short- and long-term harms including altered
later pain sensitivity, and so that adequate analgesia is an ethical and
physiological requirement, not optional.
The challenge is assessment, because the child cannot self-report.
We therefore use validated observational and physiological tools appropriate to
age: composite scores combining behavioural cues — facial expression, cry,
body movement, consolability — with physiological signs such as heart rate and
oxygen saturation, for example the FLACC scale in young children or
neonatal-specific scales, and self-report tools such as faces scales once the child
is old enough.
Management is multimodal and weight-based: paracetamol as a foundation;
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs where not contraindicated;
regional and local techniques, which are widely and effectively used in children,
including caudal and other blocks under general anaesthesia; and opioids,
titrated carefully because of the immature respiratory control and altered
handling, with monitoring for respiratory depression and apnoea.
Non-pharmacological measures — swaddling, sucrose for procedural pain in neonates,
and parental presence — are valuable adjuncts.
So paediatric pain is real and harmful,
must be assessed with age-appropriate validated tools,
and is best managed by weight-based multimodal analgesia with careful opioid
titration and generous use of regional techniques.
How do you assess dehydration and conduct fluid resuscitation in a child?
Children, with their high turnover of water and limited renal compensation,
dehydrate readily through vomiting, diarrhoea, fever or poor intake,
and assessing and correcting the deficit is a core skill.
The degree of dehydration is judged clinically and, where possible,
from acute weight loss, the most accurate measure:
a useful approach grades severity from the clinical signs — increasing tachycardia,
reduced skin turgor, dry mucous membranes, sunken eyes and fontanelle,
reduced urine output, and, in severe deficits, prolonged capillary refill,
cool peripheries, altered consciousness and hypotension,
which is a late and ominous sign in children because they maintain blood pressure
until severely depleted.
Management separates resuscitation of shock from replacement of deficit.
Compensated shock or severe dehydration is treated with boluses of isotonic
crystalloid, ten to twenty millilitres per kilogram, repeated and reassessed,
with blood for haemorrhage.
The remaining deficit, calculated from the estimated percentage dehydration times
body weight, is then replaced more gradually alongside maintenance fluid and
ongoing losses, using isotonic fluid and monitoring electrolytes and glucose,
correcting deficits over twenty-four to forty-eight hours to avoid rapid shifts.
So dehydration is graded clinically and by weight,
shock is resuscitated with isotonic boluses,
and the calculated deficit is then replaced steadily with isotonic,
glucose-aware fluid, with hypotension recognised as a late and dangerous sign.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The neonate is not a small adult: cardiac output is heart-rate dependent,
the myocardium calcium-dependent and vagally sensitive,
and hypoxia or acidosis can reopen the fetal shunts.
Second, High oxygen consumption with low,
unstable functional residual capacity means very rapid desaturation;
preoxygenation, atelectasis prevention and minimal apnoea are essential.
Third, Thermoregulation is precarious — large surface area, poor insulation,
no effective shivering, reliance on brown-fat non-shivering thermogenesis — so
active warming is a first-order priority.
Fourth, Renal and hepatic immaturity slow drug and fluid handling;
prescribe isotonic, glucose-containing fluid by the four-two-one rule,
monitor glucose, and dose all drugs to weight.
Fifth, Former preterm infants risk post-anaesthetic apnoea to about sixty weeks
post-conceptual age and need postoperative apnoea monitoring;
MAC is highest in infancy and lowest at the extremes of age.
Thank you. That concludes the station.